docs: add a guide on Batching in Tailcall (#97)
tailcallhq/tailcallhq.github.io: docs/guides/batching.md

---
title: "Batching"
---

> Batching when configured correctly, can significantly reduce strain on high-traffic REST backends. You only need to add a handful of operators to your GraphQL schema (i.e. custom directives) for Tailcall to do most of the heavy lifting for you[^1].

Reviewer: generally batching is supported for different backend in tailcall. Although, we using REST as an example here, lets use common terms for backend here and probably add that tailcall supports batching for other backend protocol as well at the end of the guide

```suggestion
Batching when configured correctly, can significantly reduce strain on high-traffic backends. You only need to add a handful of operators to your GraphQL schema (i.e. custom directives) for Tailcall to do most of the heavy lifting for you[^1].
```

> ## Scenario

Reviewer: we need some introduction before describing the scenario because it feels like steep turn for this here and hard to catch what is this about

Author: Thanks for your remarks. What would you suggest here?

The original [prompt](https://github.com/tailcallhq/tailcall/issues/882) by Tushar was:
> Write a guide about the batching capabilities of Tailcall. Consider a food delivery application where a lot of users are requesting the same data. Batching could be implemented based on GEO Location / City / Locality etc. Emphasize on the impact it has on performance and how it can help scale. Consider the backend to be in REST.

Author: @meskill I've addressed your remarks by adding a preceding sentence. Please refer to commit [a660f84](https://github.com/ayewo/tailcallhq.github.io/commit/a660f842d53fba212acc171a882240c4b24e86bb).

Reviewer 2: - REduce the drama about "perks" and "remote work" and "slack bot"
- Talk about traffic surge during lunch hours. This is not just about orders, but also users in the same GEO location requesting for the same data again and again and the upstreams services serving literraly the same data to everyone. Instead having an orchestrator that could sit in between the frontend and the upstream services could very efficiently batch these request, reducing the load massively.

Author: @tusharmath if upstream is repeatedly serving the same data to difference users, then the obvious solution here is caching and not batching. 

This is why I didn’t dwell on concurrents users but on a single user performing multiple requests. 

To my knowledge, there’s no way for Tailcall to batch requests from multiple users (read multiple simultaneous requests) into a single upstream request.

Reviewer 2: > if upstream is repeatedly serving the same data to difference users, then the obvious solution here is caching and not batching.

Not necessary, caching is relevant when the data is changing. With batching enabled, we can serve multiple people the same data without requesting it multiple times upstream and can do it even if the data isn't cachable.

>To my knowledge, there’s no way for Tailcall to batch requests from multiple users (read multiple simultaneous requests) into a single upstream request.

Check `@server.batchRequest` it allows tailcall to batch multiple requests.

Author: @tusharmath 
I feel like we are talking past each other here. Tailcall has two notions of batching but based on your feedback, it is not really clear which one you are asking for.

## Inbound Batching
My understanding of batching in this context is similar to the concept of multiplexing in HTTP/2 as illustrated by the diagram in this [SO answer](https://stackoverflow.com/a/62791439/):

![](https://i.stack.imgur.com/GawCa.png)

As an example, an end user sends 5 different graphql requests in quick succession to the Tailcall server (this might happen on app load when trying to hydrate multiple view components). Because the 5 **inbound** requests were received within a few millis of each other, the Tailcall server can decide to queue all 5 responses so it can send only 1 response to the end user, **if the Tailcall server was started with [`batchRequests`](https://tailcall.run/docs/operators/server/#batchrequests) option set to `true`**. 
This type of batching reduces the network round-trip from 5 responses down to only 1 response.

## Outbound Batching
The Tailcall server needs to make a multiple **outbound** requests to another server using a combination of the [`@upstream`](https://tailcall.run/docs/operators/upstream/#batch) operator and the [`@http`](https://tailcall.run/docs/operators/http/#batchkey) operation. Instead of making 50 or 100 requests, one-by-one, Tailcall can batch them into a single **outbound** request. This type of batching is what I understood that the original article was asking for as can be seen in the diagram, examples and description.

The only way to use geo-location to improve response times for millions of end users trying to use a service is to either use geo-routing or introduce a CDN that is geo-aware to cache identical requests. It was hard to work either of those solutions into the article which is why I focused on the Slack command example.

In fact your last sentence in the original issue was: "Consider the backend to be in REST" and I asked clarifying [questions](https://github.com/tailcallhq/tailcall/issues/882#issuecomment-1892150800) under the assumption this would be an article about *outbound batching* on the original issue but never got any response.

Essentially, this would mean a complete rewrite of an article that took 2 months just to get feedback ...

Author: @tusharmath no response ?

Author: Hey @tusharmath 
your response is needed to this question as it affects all of the feedback provided.

### Open Data Protocol

URL style #6 in the table above, uses a `Content-type` of `multipart/mixed` which makes it the most flexible way of implementing batching in REST APIs. It allows clients to submit arbitrary operations (multiple _Create_, _Read_, _Update_, and _Delete_ operations, each with its own `Content-type`) in a single request, though most services enforce a limit[^batch-size-limit] in the range of 10-1000 called the batch size. The batch size is the number of sub-requests that can be included in a single request to an endpoint that supports batching.

This style of batching has been made into a standard by Microsoft under the [Open Data Protocol](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Open_Data_Protocol) as the [OData batch processing system](https://www.odata.org/documentation/odata-version-3-0/batch-processing/). Sharepoint Online and Office 365 REST APIs are examples of Microsoft services that support [batching with their REST API](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/sharepoint/dev/sp-add-ins/make-batch-requests-with-the-rest-apis) using the OData standard.

> Some Google services have adopted the OData syntax, though the semantics differ. Examples include Google [Cloud Storage](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/batch), which supports up to 100 requests in a single batch request and Google [Workspace Admin API](https://developers.google.com/admin-sdk/directory/v1/guides/batch), which supports up to 1000 requests in a single batch request.

Reviewer: feels like too much info on other possible techniques for batching while tailcall supports only one of them. I suggest to focus only on those that are supported by tailcall and describe the main points of that, while other could be replaced by link to additional materials

Author: You have a point but while I was writing the article, I realized there were no articles that contain this info in one place. Having an in-depth article that runs through the possible techniques for batching would bring in decent traffic.

Author: @meskill I've removed the text you highlighted in the latest commit.

---

## Batching in Tailcall

Tailcall supports batching `GET` requests in REST APIs that follow the design in URL style #1 in the table above. The batch size is configurable and can be set via `@upstream(... batch.maxSize)`.

Let's now return to our meal delivery app to illustrate how it works.

### Meal Prep and Delivery

Before meals are prepped, the meal delivery app will first check how many meals it will need to make for each company and the location of the employees where each meal will be delivered. Since employees may sometimes switch between working at the office, at a co-working space or from home, the app tries to estimate each employee's current location by geolocation of their IP address.

```graphql showLineNumbers
schema
  @server(port: 8000, graphiql: true)
  # highlight-start

>   @upstream(baseURL: "https://geoip-batch.fly.dev", httpCache: true, batch: {delay: 1, maxSize: 100}) {

Reviewer: should be a little explanation about chosen options for batching and links to docs reference

Author: OK.

Author: Added links and some explanation regarding how batching works.

    country {
      query
      country
      regionName
      city
      lat
      lon
    }
  }
}
```

It will produce the following output in Tailcall:

```bash
2024-01-22T13:57:33Z INFO  tailcall::cli::tc] N + 1: 0
[2024-01-22T13:57:33Z INFO  tailcall::http] 🚀 Tailcall launched at [127.0.0.1:8000] over HTTP/1.1
[2024-01-22T13:57:33Z INFO  tailcall::http] 🌍 Playground: http://127.0.0.1:8000
[2024-01-22T13:58:04Z INFO  tailcall::http::client] GET https://geoip-batch.fly.dev/users HTTP/1.1
[2024-01-22T13:58:05Z INFO  tailcall::http::client] GET https://geoip-batch.fly.dev/batch?query=100.159.51.104&query=103.72.86.183&query=116.92.198.102&query=117.29.86.254&query=137.235.164.173&query=141.14.53.176&query=163.245.232.27&query=174.238.43.126&query=197.37.13.163&query=205.226.160.3&query=25.207.107.146&query=29.82.54.30&query=43.20.78.113&query=48.30.193.203&query=49.201.206.36&query=51.102.180.216&query=53.240.20.181&query=59.43.194.22&query=71.57.235.192&query=73.15.179.178&query=74.80.53.208&query=75.75.234.243&query=78.170.185.120&query=78.43.74.226&query=82.170.69.15&query=87.213.156.73&query=90.202.216.39&query=91.200.56.127&query=93.246.47.59&query=97.11.116.84 HTTP/1.1
```

> The `/users` endpoint returns a total of 30 users. As you can see in the output, Tailcall constructed a batch request using the IP addresses of all 30 users rather than make 30 individual requests to the geolocation service.

Reviewer: we need to describe more how is batching is more efficient here and how does it affect backend. Event if it was mentioned before. 
Also point out about the deduplication that happens when batching is enabled

Author: @meskill I've reworded.

---
title: "Batching"
---

One of the ways developers can handle the dreaded [N+1 problem](https://tailcall.run/docs/guides/n+1/) is to use batching.

Batching when configured correctly, can significantly reduce strain on high-traffic backends. You only need to add a handful of operators to your GraphQL schema (i.e. custom directives) for Tailcall to do most of the heavy lifting for you[^1].

## Scenario

Catered lunches and healthy snacks are some of the free perks startups offer to office employees, but with the rise of remote work, many startups are leaving this tradition.

One way to keep the tradition going would be a universal meal delivery application in Slack, available as a `/ship-meal` command. Managers, anywhere in the world, could use the command to have lunch delivered to teammates, including those that work from home.

### Multiple Vendors

> ![image](../../static/images/meal-delivery-app.drawio.png)

Reviewer 2: use excalidraw to create images.

### Constraints

The nature of such a service could cause traffic spikes for every upstream vendor needed to fulfil each individual order, so some care has to be taken when designing the meal app's API.

> For instance, if thousands of managers across the world use the command at the same time (just before lunch break) to place team orders, the sudden traffic spike will spread to upstream vendors, leading to delayed or failed orders.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For instance, if millions of people across the world use the command at the same time (just before lunch break) to place team orders, the sudden traffic spike will spread to upstream vendors, leading to delayed or failed orders.
```

| HTTP method | CRUD paradigm |
| ----------- | ------------- |
| `POST`      | _Create_      |
| `GET`       | _Read_        |
| `PUT`       | _Update_      |
| `DELETE`    | _Delete_      |

This one-to-one correspondence works because CRUD and REST often deal with a single entity or resource as the case may be.

```bash
  POST 	/v1/employees      (Create an employee entity)
   GET 	/v1/employees/:id  (Read an employee entity)
   PUT 	/v1/employees/:id  (Update an employee entity)
DELETE 	/v1/employees/:id  (Delete an employee entity)
   GET 	/v1/employees      (Read multiple employee entities)
```

### Low Correspondence Between Batching and CRUD

The one-to-one correspondence doesn't carry over when batching is added to a REST API because batching can either involve:

- performing the same operation on different entities of the same type (e.g. _Update_ the team's order so meals are shipped to employees with the following ids `1`, `4` & `7`) or;
- grouping together different operations in one request (e.g. _Create_ `Jain` as a new employee, _Update_ an employee's meal preferences and _Delete_ meals above a certain price from the menu).

> ### Real-world Examples of Batching

Reviewer 2: Table isn't readable because we have too many columns. Flatten it into multiple paras.

|           | `GET`       | 2. `/users/1,4,7`             | URL path params  | -                  | [ipstack.com](https://ipstack.com/documentation#bulk)                                            |
|           | `POST`      | 3. `/users/`                  | Request body     | `application/json` | [ipinfo.io](https://ipinfo.io/developers/advanced-usage#batching-requests)                       |
| _CRUD_    |             |                               |                  |                    |                                                                                                  |
|           | `POST`      | 4. `/users?batch`             | Request body     | `application/json` | [facebook.com](https://developers.facebook.com/docs/graph-api/batch-requests)                    |
|           | `POST`      | 5. `/batch/submitJob` (async) | Request body     | `application/json` | [arcgis.com](https://developers.arcgis.com/rest/services-reference/enterprise/batch-geocode.htm) |
|           | `POST`      | 6. `/batch/`                  | Request body     | `multipart/mixed`  | [google.com](https://cloud.google.com/storage/docs/batch)                                        |

> ### Batching: Sync or Async

Reviewer 2: Some context about error handling should also be added to this guide.

### Receiving an Async Response: Pull or Push

Within the async request style, there are two ways of retrieving a response from the server: pull or push.

In the pull model: the client periodically polls the server to check that the operation has completed successfully, or failed.

In the push model: when the operation is complete, the server pushes the results over an existing subscription with the client such as a web socket (for browser-based clients) or a web hook (for server-based clients).[^delivery]

### Open Data Protocol

URL style #6 in the table above, uses a `Content-type` of `multipart/mixed` which makes it the most flexible way of implementing batching in REST APIs. It allows clients to submit arbitrary operations (multiple _Create_, _Read_, _Update_, and _Delete_ operations, each with its own `Content-type`) in a single request, though most services enforce a limit[^batch-size-limit] in the range of 10-1000 called the batch size. The batch size is the number of sub-requests that can be included in a single request to an endpoint that supports batching.

---

> ## Batching in Tailcall

Reviewer 2: I think the head of the document is generally talking about REST & Batching. The jump to Tailcall is quite sudden. I would split this doc into two separate ones. The tailcall specific bits should be in the guide, the remaining stuff can be on our blogs.
